---
layout: essay
type: essay
title: "Personal SWOT Analysis and Goal-Setting Plan"
# All dates must be YYYY-MM-DD format!
date: 2025-01-12
published: true
labels:
  - Professional Development
---
  When it comes to bettering yourself professionally, one way is to take a personal SWOT analysis. A SWOT analysis analyzes your strengths, weaknesses, opportunities you have, and threats to yourself. Using this system, I can aim to find improvement in myself and see what is possible with the skills I have now.

  Firstly, to start the SWOT analysis, I will speak about my strengths. When it comes to my strengths, I have strengths in both my knowledge and mindset. Throughout my life, I have passively and both actively taken a liking to a lot of different things technology, whether it is programming, hardware, or technicalities. Due to this, I have pursued the path of IT or Computer Information Technologist specifically. What this means is that I have a broad and useful knowledge on things technological in the realm of computers specifically. This knowledge is very useful in IT jobs and many other lower level jobs that focus on specifics of the degree. Another part of me that has come passively and both actively over the years are leadership skills. During middle school up till the end of high school, I was part of Scouting of America. In scouting, I obtained the highest rank of Eagle Scout which could only be obtained after many long months of leadership positions and leading a project known as the Eagle Scout project. This project required me to lead a team to complete a community service based project. I had accomplished this and eventually obtained Eagle Scout. Using these skills I obtained my first job in customer service at 16. For the next 3 years at Walmart as an electronics associate, I often would strategize and work with my team to efficiently get plans done, putting my obtained skills in place. One last strength of mine is my preparedness. Preparedness is one thing I had been told to find importance of in scouting. To add to this as well, the scout motto is be prepared. For a long time in my life I have made sure to be prepared for anything such as heading to work at least an hour early or trying to plan out a schedule for college each week.

  Second, to continue on the SWOT analysis, I will speak about my weaknesses. One problem with my life I have had since birth is that I suffer from ADHD or Attention Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder. Finding out the implications of this over time has taken its time and I have learned a lot. Some problems from this are easy distractions. Examples of this are reading chapters of a book but switching to a youtube video in the middle of reading, making reading go on much longer. If my brain isn’t constantly stimulated, a much bigger problem in the age of technology, I can lose focus pretty easily. Another weakness I have is postponing things if I have the ability to, or procrastination. Although I don’t always procrastinate, one thing I always lead to doing in terms of college is procrastination. When I start a week, I try to plan what days I will do specific things or assignments. However, sometimes if I feel I can get away with doing an assignment on a different day, I sometimes might resort to doing it then which can lead to more pressure and anxiety on the day of. My final weakness, albeit one that is not as prevalent anymore, would be anger issues. I keep all anger out of anywhere professional, however in my personal life, in the past I would hold back less in anger when confronted with the wrongdoing of others. I have confronted this issue for a good amount of time to lessen it to a healthy amount.

  Third, after finishing the second part of the SWOT analysis, I will speak about my opportunities. I have several opportunities based on my strengths alone which mainly consist of professional skills and specific skills. With my skills up to this point, I have opportunities of a few kinds. My first opportunity from my skills is basic application and basic game making. My skills are quite decent at these things but not super professional, however I have practiced in a few programming languages and environments, giving me opportunities to work with these things. My next opportunity is PC hardware management. Since early high school, I researched and accomplished the building of my first PC. After that time, I made numerous upgrades to different parts calling for complex issues that I overcame. Classes in high school also helped me prove this knowledge as well and even into the server realm. With these skills I have opportunities for jobs with these kinds of issues. Lastly, I have studied the technicality of IT as a whole with networking, cybersecurity, and their tools as a whole which elevate me to opportunities for those kinds of jobs.

  Lastly, for the final part of the SWOT analysis, I will speak about my threats. There are a few that could be in my way for a while. First, not passing my classes. Although I doubt I will fail, the threat very much exists. The time I was closest to failing, my doubts were put away as I passed my finals through hard work. If I were to fail it would create financial issues on my scholarship paid tuition, preventing me from obtaining my dream job. Next, failing to obtain my next certifications. As I have earned free tickets to some certifications, failing them would result in needing to pay for test taking. This would hinder me from progressing to my dream job. Lastly, the possibility of not obtaining my dream job. I believe that with my hard work and everything I have done up to this point and then, I will accomplish it, however like any goal, the odds are never zero.

Now, after conducting a SWOT analysis, one thing you can do is make SMART goals. SMART goals are goals that are made using the outline of specific, measurable, achievable, relevant, and time-bound.

When it comes to a short-term goal that I can achieve through the SMART outline within the next 3 to 6 months, it is one this paper is contributing to right now. That goal is to finish my associates in Information Technology. For the specifics of this goal, I might either need to finish this quarter or to finish this quarter and a possible next quarter as I am not sure if my expected graduation date is accurate. The reason for this inaccuracy is due to taking a jumpstart program allowing me to obtain extra credits. However, finishing these 1 or 2 quarters would help me accomplish this goal in both a measurable and specific way. This goal is very much achievable as I have proven to be able to pass the courses I have had up to now. If I accomplish this goal it will assist in future jobs that I would like to obtain making it relevant. Lastly, accomplishing this within either 3 or 6 months would make it time-bound, successfully making it a SMART goal.

  Next for a medium-term goal that I can achieve within the next 1-2 years are to obtain my A+ and Net+ IT certifications. To specifically obtain this goal is a little fuzzy however my plans to accomplish it at least leads a path. Firstly for specifics I must find an application dedicated to the studying of these exams. Second, I must study these exams until almost every question possible is in my memory. Lastly, I must go and take the exams and pass to get both certifications. I can measure my progress based on which exams I have mastered the knowledge of. This is an achievable goal because many of my classes have expended information to me that relates to the completion of these exams up to this point. If I achieve this goal then it means I would have a degree and certifications by then making me very job applicable. Accomplishing this goal within at least a year to two would assist me in making my dream job, making it a time bound goal and thus a SMART goal.

  For my final and long-term goal that I can achieve within the next 3-5 years, I plan to make a move from my hometown for the purpose of finding a better place to live where I can find a good option for my dream job. One current problem about trying to obtain my dream job is the lack of options in the town I am from. The place I would like to move to has plenty of job opportunities known as noblesville. Specifically to achieve this goal I would need to save large sums of money to afford the travel and housing. Along with this I need to have completed my short-term and medium-term goals to meet the prerequisites for a job like this. Measurably I can make progress towards it by researching how much money is required to live in the town and the cost to go there and saving up to reach beyond that goal. Once I have and have also completed my goals, I must apply for jobs until I can get one. Once I have done all of that I can make the move there. This goal is achievable as I have made much progress from the hardest goal being my short-term goal. If I complete this goal then I would have completed a long dream of mine making it relevant. Accomplishing this within at least 3 years sounds more than enough time to get it done, making it a time-bound goal and a SMART goal.

Now after doing a SWOT analysis and making SMART goals based on the analysis, I have gained a new perspective on my professional development. What I can see now is that I have a straight path forward, I just have to keep putting in my fullest effort. Once I have accomplished my long-term goal, it will be time to make new plans and another SWOT analysis with SMART goals will be due to happen again.
